---
title: Getting Started
index: 1
---
# Getting Started
**_How hard could it be?_**

{/* image of wrench bucket -> fire */}

Firestore is pretty cool. It is a NoSQL document database that lets you store
arbitrary documents in hierarchical collections, but it also lets you perform
queries and transactions similar to those you can make with a SQL database. On
top of that, Firestore allows frontend clients to connect directly to the
database and listen for changes that affect their queries, removing the need for
the user to implement stateful websockets or poll their servers for updates. In
this regard Firestore acts not only as a database, but also as a full fledged
system for managing data synchronization between your frontend and backend.

In this article we will take a look at how we could implement many of the
features that Firestore provides using standard open source and cloud
technologies.

But first,

## Why would we do this?

It's a fair question. Firestore is flush with features, so why would we go
through the effort of implementing a system that does pretty much the same
thing?

### It's fun!

Just had to get this out of the way. I am mostly just writing this for fun.
Firestore is a pretty cool system to investigate, so I hope you enjoy reading
about how I go about implementing it!

### You're not on gcp

Firestore is a GCP product and does not have a direct equivalent in other cloud
providers. If all of your apps and services are based in AWS for example, you
might not be able to readily use technologies in GCP. Or maybe your division
built multiple frontend apps around Firebase then your company made the
unilateral decision to move to AWS, and now you are stuck figuring out what to
do.

### You need more configurability

Firestore is a generic product. It has to meet the needs of a wide range of
clients, and it does not provide many options for configuration. Features that
make it quick and easy to get up and running with Firestore can become a
liability when you are scaling and have much higher database traffic. You might
want to continue using a data management system like Firestore but need to tweak
parameters of the system to make it more performant and scalable for your use
case.

Cloud Firestore is designed to get you up and running quickly. You don't need to
worry about deploying your database or allocating resources for it. You just
make a project and then pay per read and write. This cost model is convenient
for getting a project started quickly, but it limits that amount of
configurability you can have. A cost model where you pay for the underlying 
infrastructure supporting your database rather than paying per read and write
opens up a lot of opens for configurability.

### You're cloud costs are too high

Firestore is designed to be highly scalable and have a low barrier to entry, but
it is also quite expensive. This likely doesn't matter when you are just
starting a company and want to get up and running quickly, but as your traffic 
grows, Firestore's high price per read and write could become a problem. Over the
course of this series, we will see how Firestore's default features incur a lot
of overhead whether you are using them or not. Firestore let's you turn some of
these features off, but many of them are on no matter what. Running a customized
version of Firestore would give you the transparency needed to understand what
operations are expensive and allow you to turn off expensive features that you
don't need. 

At the end of this series, I will show some examples
of how we could customize our database to suit our needs in a way that Firestore
might not.

## #Goals

The purpose of this article is to demonstrate how we could implement a data
management system like Firestore using technologies that are either open source
or available with most cloud providers.

I will focus on designing this system so that we get our desired features with
acceptable time and space complexity, but I will not focus on optimizing our
solution. Instead, I want to convey how we could overcome the key technical
hurdles that get in the way of making a database like Firestore, and to that
end, will opt for clarity over performance. Likewise, code samples I include
will be correct, but won't be production ready. I will assume that all inputs
and validated and well formatted and the general approach to error handling 
will be to panic.

I also want to note in advance that I do not have any inside knowledge of how
Firestore is implemented. This series is just me taking a stab at how I would
build a similar product.

With that out of the way, let's dive right in! ... to defining our requirements
