---
title: Bonus Features and Configurability
index: 16
---
### Bonus Features!

One of the nice things about building your own database is that you can make it
do whatever you want! So far in this series, we have been focussed on
replicating the features of firestore. Now we will take a high level look at
some additional features we might want to add

### Opt in queries on simple fields

We saw earlier in the [simple queries] and [simple subscriptions] sections the
processing overhead that comes

Having fields be automatically queriable is convenient when you are just
starting a project and want to mimimized any configuration other than your code,
but for a mature project, specifying which fields you want to be able to query
is not a very high burden. We could provide the option to have simple queries be
opt in on a field, document, or collection level. This would significantly
reduce the cost of writing new documents to the database. Since we woudl be
running this database on our own infrastructure, reducing the write overhead
would have a direct impact on our cloud costs.

### Allow more complex composite queries

This one comes with some caveats. Firestore only allows us to have inequality
operators on one field in a composite query. This pretty much guarantees that we
will not write an inefficient query. Once you start allowing inequality
operators on more than one field the effectiveness of the B-Tree index for that
query starts to go down. Since we would be responsible for the cost of the
infrastructure the database is running on rather than paying per document read
and write, we could allow these potentially less efficient queries. We would
still want to proceed with caution though so we don't bog down our database.

### Configurable TTL for client subscriptions

In Firestore if a client has been disconnected for more than about 30 minutes,
any subscriptions made by the client expire and will have to be fully reloaded
when the client reconnects. This is generally a good thing as it prevents you
from performing upkeep on old subscriptions that are not going to be checked any
time soon, but the TTL that you would want to have on a subscription can vary
significantly by the type of subscription. For example, you may have a
subscription to a high touch document that you only want to be active while the
client is actively connected and receiving updates. In this case the cost of
reloading the entire subscription (one document) is low, and the cost of
maintaining the subscription (a frequent additional write) is high.

A very different situation would be a messaging app (this one is from personal
experience). For a messaging app, you would ideally like to subscribe to the
list of a users messages once and never have to reload the entire message
collection. Reloading a users entire message history is expensive, but just
retrieving the messages they have received since they last connected is
relatively cheap. In this case you would want to set a long TTL (eg. weeks), so
that fully refreshes are rare.

Firestore likely doesn't allow you to adjust the TTL for a subscription because
users are charged a fixe price per read and write. Increasing the TTL on a
subscription would increase the internal cost of those operations. However,
since we are running this database on our own infrastructure, there is nothing
stopping us from setting TTL's that makes the most sense for our application and
subscriptions (I am still annoyed by how much time I could have saved in a
previous project if Firestore provided this feature out of the box).

### Protobuf-like ability to rename collections and field names

Being schemaless is one of Firestore's selling points, but there are often times
where that can slow down development. One way this comes up is in Choosing name
for fields and collections. When you are starting a project that needs to
iterate rapidly, you likely don't want to spend lots of time carefully choosing
names for your fields, but you also don't have the full context of what other
fields and collections might exist in the future. This can lead to a situation
where aftera. few months of development naming choices that made sense at the
time are quite confusing.

Because collection and field names are stored explicitly as strings within
Firestore and referenced explicitly in client code, migrating these names
without causing interuptions is difficult.

It would be great to be able to provide a client side config that would
translate between an internal name that is stored in the firestore and a name
that is used in your client side code (much like protobuf). Then you could name
your fields whatever you felt like in the moment, have those field names be
given a constant compact representation, and change the client side name
whenever you want.

### Provide transparent support for large blob storage

One of the annoying things about working with photos, videos, and other large
files types is that you can't (or at least shouldn't) store them directly in
your database. The standard solution is to store the large file in networked
storage and save the path to the file in your database. This works, but adds
additional hassle to working with these files since you have to first retrieve
the file information from the database, then separately load the file from
storage, and then do the reverse if you are editing the file.

We are already putting a server in front of our database, so there is not much
stopping us from providing a extra "large_blob" data type that will
transparently do this file management for us. Behind the scenes we would manage
storing the blob in file storage, and storing the file id in the database. From
the user's perspective you would be allowed to write arbitrarily sized blobs
directly to the database, without encountering the performance issues this would
normally incur.
